https://issues.redhat.com/browse/ACM-4959 Silence and suppress alerts + modularization (#5070)
open-cluster-management/rhacm-docs: observability/observability_alerts.adoc

    receiver: team-X-mails
----

Your changes are applied immediately after it is modified. For an example of Alertmanager, see https://github.com/prometheus/alertmanager/blob/master/doc/examples/simple.yml[prometheus/alertmanager].

[#forward-alerts]
== Forwarding alerts

After you enable observability, alerts from your {ocp-short} managed clusters are automatically sent to the hub cluster. You can use the `alertmanager-config` YAML file to configure alerts with an external notification system. 

View the following example of the `alertmanager-config` YAML file:

[source,yaml]
----
global:
  slack_api_url: '<slack_webhook_url>'

route:
  receiver: 'slack-notifications'
  group_by: [alertname, datacenter, app]

receivers:
- name: 'slack-notifications'
  slack_configs:
  - channel: '#alerts'
    text: 'https://internal.myorg.net/wiki/alerts/{{ .GroupLabels.app }}/{{ .GroupLabels.alertname }}'
----

If you want to configure a proxy for alert forwarding, add the following `global` entry to the `alertmanager-config` YAML file:

[source,yaml]
----
global:
  slack_api_url: '<slack_webhook_url>'
  http_config:
    proxy_url: http://****
----

[#disabling-forward-alerts]

> === Disabling forward alerts for managed clusters

Reviewer: Disabling alert forwarding for managed clusters?

Author: Updated

> Disable alert forwarding for managed clusters. Add the following annotation to the `MultiClusterObservability` custom resource:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To disable alert forwarding for managed clusters, add the following annotation to the `MultiClusterObservability` custom resource:
```

[source,yaml]
----
metadata:
      annotations:
        mco-disable-alerting: "true"
----

When you set the annotation, the alert forwarding configuration on the managed clusters is reverted. Any changes made to the `ocp-monitoring-config` ConfigMap in the `openshift-monitoring` namespace are also reverted. Setting the annotation ensures that the `ocp-monitoring-config` ConfigMap is no longer managed or updated by the observability operator endpoint. After you update the configuration, the Prometheus instance on your managed cluster restarts.

> *Important:* Metrics on your managed cluster are lost if you have a Prometheus instance with a persistent volume for metrics, and the Prometheus instance restarts. However, metrics from the hub cluster are not affected.

Reviewer: Suggestion: Not sure we need "However" here. Maybe just, "Metrics from the hub cluster are not affected."

----

- Silence an alert by using multiple match labels. The following command uses `match-label-1` and `match-label-2`:
+
----
amtool silence add --alertmanager.url="http://localhost:9093" --author="user" --comment="Silencing sample alert" <match-label-1>=<match-value-1> <match-label-2>=<match-value-2>
----

- If you want to silence an alert for a specific period of time, use the `--duration` flag. Run the following command to silence the `SampleAlert` for an hour:
+
----
amtool silence add --alertmanager.url="http://localhost:9093" --author="user" --comment="Silencing sample alert" --duration="1h" alertname="SampleAlert"
----
+
You can also specify a start or end time for the silenced alert. Enter the following command to silence the `SampleAlert` for a specific start time:
+
----
amtool silence add --alertmanager.url="http://localhost:9093" --author="user" --comment="Silencing sample alert" --start="2023-04-14T15:04:05-07:00" alertname="SampleAlert"
----

- To view all silenced alerts that are created, run the following command:
+
----
amtool silence --alertmanager.url="http://localhost:9093"
----

> - If you no longer want an alert to be silenced, expire the silenced alert by running the following command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- If you no longer want an alert to be silenced, end the silenced alert by running the following command:
```

+
----
amtool silence expire --alertmanager.url="http://localhost:9093" "d839aca9-ed46-40be-84c4-dca8773671da"
----
+

> - To expire the silencing of all alerts, run the following command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- To end the silencing of all alerts, run the following command:
```

Reviewer: If you want to keep "expire," that is ok. I think it looks a little strange, but I see where it might be more accurate in these cases.

After you enable observability, alerts from your {ocp-short} managed clusters are automatically sent to the hub cluster. You can use the `alertmanager-config` YAML file to configure alerts with an external notification system. 

View the following example of the `alertmanager-config` YAML file:

[source,yaml]
----
global:
  slack_api_url: '<slack_webhook_url>'

route:
  receiver: 'slack-notifications'
  group_by: [alertname, datacenter, app]

receivers:
- name: 'slack-notifications'
  slack_configs:
  - channel: '#alerts'
    text: 'https://internal.myorg.net/wiki/alerts/{{ .GroupLabels.app }}/{{ .GroupLabels.alertname }}'
----

If you want to configure a proxy for alert forwarding, add the following `global` entry to the `alertmanager-config` YAML file:

[source,yaml]
----
global:
  slack_api_url: '<slack_webhook_url>'
  http_config:
    proxy_url: http://****
----

[#disabling-forward-alerts]
=== Disabling forward alerts for managed clusters

Disable alert forwarding for managed clusters. Add the following annotation to the `MultiClusterObservability` custom resource:

[source,yaml]
----
metadata:
      annotations:
        mco-disable-alerting: "true"
----

> When you set the annotation, the alert forwarding configuration on the managed clusters is reverted. Any changes made to the `ocp-monitoring-config` ConfigMap in the `openshift-monitoring` namespace are reverted. Setting the annotation ensures that the `ocp-monitoring-config` ConfigMap is no longer managed or updated by the observability operator endpoint. After you update the configuration, the Prometheus instance on your managed cluster restarts.

Reviewer: Suggestion: ...namespace are also reverted.

Author: Updated

*Important:* Metrics on your managed cluster are lost if you have a Prometheus instance with a persistent volume for metrics, and the Prometheus instance restarts. However, metrics from the hub cluster are not affected.

> When the changes are reverted, a ConfigMap named `cluster-monitoring-reverted` is createde in the `open-cluster-management-addon-observability` namespace. Any new, manually added alert forward configurations are not reverted from the ConfigMap. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When the changes are reverted, a ConfigMap named `cluster-monitoring-reverted` is created in the `open-cluster-management-addon-observability` namespace. Any new, manually added alert forward configurations are not reverted from the ConfigMap. 
```

Verify that the hub cluster alert manager is no longer propagating managed cluster alerts to third-party messaging tools. See the previous section, _Configuring AlertManager_.

[#silence-alerts]
== Silencing alerts

> Add alerts that you do not want to recieve. You can silence alerts by the alert name, match label, or time duration. After you add the alert that you want to silence, an ID is created. your ID for your silenced alert might resemble the following string, `d839aca9-ed46-40be-84c4-dca8773671da`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Add alerts that you do not want to receive. You can silence alerts by the alert name, match label, or time duration. After you add the alert that you want to silence, an ID is created. Your ID for your silenced alert might resemble the following string, `d839aca9-ed46-40be-84c4-dca8773671da`.
```

Continue reading for ways to silence alerts:

> - To silence a {product-title-short} alert, you must have access to the `alertmanager-main` pod in the `open-cluster-management-observability` namespace. For eample, enter the following command in the pod terminal to silence `SampleAlert`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- To silence a {product-title-short} alert, you must have access to the `alertmanager-main` pod in the `open-cluster-management-observability` namespace. For example, enter the following command in the pod terminal to silence `SampleAlert`:
```

----

- Silence an alert by using multiple match labels. The following command uses `match-label-1` and `match-label-2`:
+
----
amtool silence add --alertmanager.url="http://localhost:9093" --author="user" --comment="Silencing sample alert" <match-label-1>=<match-value-1> <match-label-2>=<match-value-2>
----

- If you want to silence an alert for a specific period of time, use the `--duration` flag. Run the following command to silence the `SampleAlert` for an hour:
+
----
amtool silence add --alertmanager.url="http://localhost:9093" --author="user" --comment="Silencing sample alert" --duration="1h" alertname="SampleAlert"
----
+
You can also specify a start or end time for the silenced alert. Enter the following command to silence the `SampleAlert` for a specific start time:
+
----
amtool silence add --alertmanager.url="http://localhost:9093" --author="user" --comment="Silencing sample alert" --start="2023-04-14T15:04:05-07:00" alertname="SampleAlert"
----

- To view all silenced alerts that are created, run the following command:
+
----
amtool silence --alertmanager.url="http://localhost:9093"
----

> - If you do not require an alert to be silence, expire the silenced alert. To expire a specific silenced alert, run the following command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- If you no longer want an alert to be silenced, expire the silenced alert by running the following command:
```

+
----
amtool silence expire --alertmanager.url="http://localhost:9093" "d839aca9-ed46-40be-84c4-dca8773671da"
----
+

> - To expire all silences, run the following command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- To expire the silencing of all alerts, run the following command:
```

+
----
amtool silence expire --alertmanager.url="http://localhost:9093" $(amtool silence query --alertmanager.url="http://localhost:9093" -q) 
----

[#supress-alerts]
== Suppressing alerts

> //suppressing seems similar to silencing , is my explanation accurate?

Author: @dislbenn

Reviewer 2: @dockerymick I wouldn't say that the alert is suppressing duplicates. It's more on the line that if and when there is an alert that triggers, you can suppress/mute other alerts that match certain criteria.

For example, if I apply a policy on my cluster that has a `high` level severity, and if later on in the day that policy is violated, I would expect to get an alert. The inhibit rule would basically say, there is a `high` level severity alert that needs to be focused on; therefore, suppress any other alerts that are of lower severity, until this one is no longer firing.

Author: Thanks! Updated!

Suppress {product-title-short} alerts across your clusters globally that are duplicates. Suppress alerts by defining an inhibition rule in the `alertmanager-config` in the `open-cluster-management-observability` namespace. 

> An inhibition rule mutes an alert by retrieving a set of parameter matches when an alert that matches another set of matchers exists. In order for the rule to take effect, both the target and source alerts must have the same label values for the label names in the `equal` list. An `inhibit_rule` might resemble the following:

Reviewer: The first sentence is confusing to me. Are we saying something like: An inhibition rule mutes an alert when it detects that a set of parameters matches a specified set of parameters.?

[source,yaml]
----
global:
  resolve_timeout: 1h
inhibit_rules:<1>
  - equal:
      - namespace
    source_match:<2>
      severity: critical
    target_match_re:
      severity: warning|info
----

> <1> The `inhibit_rule` parameter section is defined to look for alerts in the same namespace. When a `critical` alert is initiated within a namespace and if there are any other alerts that contain the severity level `warning` or `info` in that namespace, only the `critical` alerts are routed to the Alertmanager receiver. The following alerts might be displayed when there are matches:

Reviewer: In the example, it is `inhibit_rules`, while the description contains `inhibit_rule`. They should probably both be the same.

Reviewer: I think these are still different. Is that intentional?

Author: no not intentional, just missed. thanks!

> <1> The `inhibit_rule` parameter section is defined to look for alerts in the same namespace. When a `critical` alert is initiated within a namespace and if there are any other alerts that contain the severity level `warning` or `info` in that namespace, only the `critical` alerts are routed to the Alertmanager receiver. The following alerts might be displayed when there are matches:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<1> The `inhibit_rule` parameter section is defined to look for alerts in the same namespace. When a `critical` alert is initiated within a namespace and if there are any other alerts that contain the severity level `warning` or `info` in that namespace, only the `critical` alerts are routed to the AlertManager receiver. The following alerts might be displayed when there are matches:
```

Author: @cadawson Alertmanager is correct. That is how its referenced in the Prometheus docs: https://prometheus.io/docs/alerting/latest/alertmanager/

Reviewer 2: If `Alertmanager` is the correct spelling, then we will probably need to adjust the spelling above also, since there are a few occasions where it is spelled as `AlertManager`.

Author: Updated instances of Alertmanager

+
----
ALERTS{alertname="foo", namespace="ns-1", severity="critical"}
ALERTS{alertname="foo", namespace="ns-1", severity="warning"}
----
+

> <2>If the source and target alert matchers do not match, the alert is routed to the receiver:

Reviewer: It looks like we are using "alert matchers". I thought that was a typo earlier. If that is true, maybe consider using, "the value of the `source_match`, or something? If not, matchers might be ok.

Author: we are using alert matchers
